That mutations in amino acids 6-11 at the N terminus and mutations at the C terminus of ICP27 both affect the interaction in vitro with bacterially purified Nup62 suggests that both regions of ICP27 may act together for Nup62 binding. However, N-terminal mutant 10-512, which deletes part (aa 6-9) of the ICP27 NES (aa 6-19) when used in the transport assay, in 70% of cells showed a phenotype similar to full-length WT protein. In fewer cells, nuclear retention of the reporter protein was also observed. Our observations are similar to those reported earlier that mutant d1-2 (which deletes aa 12-63, including part of NES aa 6-19) showed reduced shuttling, and in the dleu mutant, deletion of NES (aa 6-19) of ICP27 weakened but did not abrogate shuttling. Mutant ICP27 dleu virus is replication-deficient but not replication-defective. Hence, for these N-terminal mutants, alternative routes for nuclear egress appear to exist when other regions of the protein, especially the C terminus, are intact. Our observations are not quantitative in nature but help us to understand the role(s) played by various segments of ICP27. From the ICP27-Nup62 interaction even in the presence of LMB (supplemental Fig. S2) and from transport assays utilizing various N- and C-terminal ICP27 plasmid mutations, it becomes clear that, although the N-terminal region of ICP27 affects its ability to bind Nup62 in vitro, functionally it appears to be the C terminus of ICP27 that acts as the major region of importance for shuttling of viral protein. These data revealed that mutants that reduce protein-protein interactions with Nup62 at the C terminus alter and dramatically decrease the ability of ICP27 to shuttle and also inhibit multiple host cell nucleo-cytoplasmic transport pathways. The ICP27 M15 mutant protein appears to be able to enter the nucleus after synthesis in the cytoplasm via alternative routes; however, its ability to export out of the nucleus seems to be defective. Loss of Nup62 interaction correlates with the inability of M15 to re-export and shuttle continuously, and it appears that as a result of the loss of this crucial function, M15 is replication-defective. With regard to cellular and viral mRNA processing, HeLa cells infected with M15 mutant virus failed to accumulate cellular unspliced alpha-globin pre-mRNA, and mutation in the M15 virus greatly increased the length and heterogeneity of the poly(A) tail of spliced alpha-globin mRNA. Additionally, ICP0 is one of the few intron-containing viral genes, and it yielded no detectable intron 1-containing transcripts in M15 infections. M15 protein has been reported to have an exclusively nuclear distribution, and in contrast to the WT ICP27 protein, the M15 mutant protein was absent from the polyribosome fractions. It remains possible, however, that the M15 mutation might affect activities of ICP27 other than NPC interaction.
