Search for putative new Siah2 substrates was performed using LC-MS/MS analysis of proteins bound to a ligase-deficient Siah2 RING mutant (Siah2RM). Among Siah2-bound proteins this analysis confirmed three known Siah-interacting proteins, OGDH (2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase), GAPDH (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase), and TPX2 (microtubule-associated protein homolog) (supplementary Figure S1a). Notably, this analysis also identified high number of peptides for two members of the ASPP proteins, ASPP1 and ASPP2. Initial support for the possibility that ASPPs may be Siah2 substrates was the finding that both proteins contained Siah2 degrons (supplementary Figure S1a) and that bands corresponding to the expected molecular weight of ASPP proteins were detected in the silver staining analysis of Siah2 interacting proteins (supplementary Figure S1b). These initial observations were corroborated by a series of Siah1/2-ASPP1/2 biochemical studies. First, we observed a specific interaction between ASPP1/2 and Siah1/2 using ectopically expressed proteins (Figure 1a; supplementary Figure S1c). Of interest, the in vitro analysis for ASPP1/2-Siah1/2 interaction was higher using immunoprecipitated ASPP1 and ASPP2, (Figure 1b; supplementary Figure S1d and S1e), suggesting that ASPP1/2 may be subject to post-translational modification required for efficient interaction with Siah2. Notably, specific interaction between endogenous ASPP1/2 and Siah2 was also detected, albeit, in the presence of the proteasome inhibitor, implying that inhibition of proteasome-dependent degradation of ASPP1/2 upon association with Siah2 increases the available pool of ASPP1/2 for interacting with Siah2 (Figure 1c; supplementary Figure S1f). That input level of ASPP2 was not increased in cells treated with MG132 is consistent with the notion that ASPP2 requires post-translational modification for efficient recognition by Siah2, enriched upon IP. Among the two ubiquitin ligases, endogenous Siah2, but not Siah1, was found to interact with ASPPs, implying physiological relevant regulation of these substrates by Siah2.
