Protein purification of SelK U92, SelK U92C, and SelK U92S was as formerly detailed with the additional step of Strep-Tactin affinity chromatography. In short, cells were defrosted and sonicated in amylose buffer. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 20000g for 1 h. The supernatant was loaded on an amylose column, which was washed with the amylose buffer for 5 column volumes (CV) followed by a wash with 50 mM sodium phosphate (pH 7.5), 200 mM NaCI, 1 mM EDTA, and 0.067% n-dodecyl-b-D-maltopyranoside (DDM) (exchange buffer) for 5 CV. The fusion cMBP-SelK was eluted using 5 CV exchange buffer supplemented with 20 mM maltose. Cleavage of the fusion partner, MBP, was carried out by adding a hexahistidine-tagged TEV protease to the dialysis bag overnight at 4 degreesC. The TEV protease was added at a molar ratio of 1:10 relative to the fusion MBP-SelK protein. Following cleavage, TEV and MBP were removed using immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography. The protein was then loaded on a 5 ml Strep Trap HP (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with exchange buffer. SelK was eluted in the exchange buffer, with a linear gradient of 0-2.5 mM desthiobiotin. The fractions containing SelK were collected, concentrated to 2 mg/mL, loaded onto a sephacryl 200 (GE Healthcare), and eluted with exchange buffer. Protein purity was analyzed using sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and coomassie blue staining. The protein concentrations of SelK U92, SelK U92C, and SelK U92S were determined using an extinction coefficient of 20970 M-1 cm-1 or by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay. The free thiol/selenol count of SelK U92 and SelK U92C was determined using Ellman's reagent 5,5'-dithiobis-(2-nitrobenzoic acid) (DTNB). The extent of selenium incorporation in a given protein sample was measured by electrospray mass spectrometry as described below. When values were compared to measurements by Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) spectroscopy, the agreement was within a factor of 3. We believe that in this specific case mass spectrometry more accurately reflects the actual percent incorporation because ICP also reported sulfur from residual TEV protease. TEV protease contains several Met residues and, hence, can bias the ratio of sulfur to selenium. The incorporation ratio as judged from mass spectrometry varied from 80% to 90% between batches. We refer to this form as SelK U92 (see section 3.1). The concentrations given in the paper are those of the selenium containing SelK in a given preparation.
