(A) Tim17R105A mutant is correctly inserted into the inner membrane. Submitochondrial localization of Tim17, wild type (WT) and R105A mutant (tim17R105A), was analyzed by its accessibility to Proteinase K (PK) in intact mitochondria, upon opening of the outer membrane (+ swelling) and upon solubilization of both mitochondrial membranes (+TX-100). In addition, mitochondria were subjected to carbonate extraction (CE) and fractionated into supernatant (S) and pellet (P) fractions that contain soluble and membrane proteins, respectively. All samples were analyzed by SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblotting with indicated antibodies. Tom70 served as a marker for a membrane-integrated outer membrane protein, Tim50 for a membrane-integrated inner membrane protein exposed to the intermembrane space and Mge1 for a soluble matrix protein. (B) Mitochondria were isolated from wild type (WT) and tim17R105A (R105A) yeast cells grown under permissive conditions in YPD medium at 24degreesC. In vitro imports of indicated precursor proteins were performed as described in Figure 2--figure supplement 1. (C) Ten-fold serial dilutions of cells were spotted on YPD and YPLac plates and incubated at indicated temperatures. (D) Isolated mitochondria, as indicated, were solubilized in digitonin-containing buffer and cleared lysates were incubated with affinity purified antibodies to Tim17, Tim23 and Tim16 prebound to Protein A-Sepharose. Antibodies from preimmune (PI) serum were used as a negative control. After three washing steps, proteins specifically bound to the beads were eluted with Laemmli buffer. Total (20%) and bound fractions (100%) were analyzed by SDS-PAGE followed by immunoblotting with indicated antibodies. (E) Cells carrying a His-tagged version of Tim17 and a BPA residue at position 106 were UV irradiated, where indicated. Total cell extracts were prepared, diluted with Triton X-100 buffer and incubated with Ni-agarose beads. After three washing steps, specifically bound proteins were eluted. Samples were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting with Tim44 antibodies.
