Effect of propeptide mutations on post-translational processing of factor IX. Evidence that beta-hydroxylation and gamma-carboxylation are independent events. 
Post-translational processing of Factor IX includes glycosylation, cleavage of the signal peptide and propeptide, vitamin K-dependent carboxylation of specific glutamic acid residues to form gamma-carboxyglutamic acid, and beta-hydroxylation of aspartic acid at residue 64 to form beta-hydroxyaspartic acid. The human Factor IX cDNA coding sequence was modified in the propeptide region (residue -18 to -1) using oligonucleotide-directed site-specific mutagenesis, and the altered Factor IX cDNA was expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells. The effects of the mutations on proteolytic processing, gamma-carboxylation, and beta-hydroxylation were assessed by direct structural analysis. After purification, the molecular weight of each of the recombinant Factor IX species and its NH2-terminal amino acid sequence were shown to be identical to those of plasma Factor IX. gamma-Carboxyglutamic acid and beta-hydroxyaspartic acid analyses revealed that recombinant wild-type Factor IX contained 9.2 gamma-carboxyglutamic acid and 0.3 beta-hydroxyaspartic acid residues/molecule compared with 11.4 gamma-carboxyglutamic acid and 0.39 beta-hydroxyaspartic acid residues in plasma Factor IX. When the 18-residue propeptide was deleted or when the cells were grown in the presence of sodium warfarin, secreted Factor IX contained no detectable gamma-carboxyglutamic acid but 0.36 and 0.40 residues of beta-hydroxyaspartic acid, respectively. Point mutations leading to substitution of alanine for phenylalanine at residue -16 or glutamic acid for alanine at residue -10 contained 0.2 and 1.7 gamma-carboxyglutamic acid residues, respectively, and 0.2 residues of beta-hydroxyaspartic acid. These data confirm that the propeptide mutations made do not interfere with proteolytic processing and that the Factor IX propeptide contains a recognition site that designates the adjacent glutamic acid-rich domain for gamma-carboxylation. In contrast, beta-hydroxylation of aspartic acid 64 is an independent process which does not require vitamin K and is mediated through a hydroxylation recognition site in the mature Factor IX, not in the propeptide.
