Developmental changes in the modification of lysosomal enzymes in Dictyostelium discoideum. 
Evidence has been found for a generalized change in the post-translational modification of lysosomal enzymes during development of Dictyostelium discoideum. The physical and antigenic properties of four developmentally regulated lysosomal enzymes, N-acetylglucosaminidase, beta-glucosidase, alpha-mannosidase, and acid phosphatase, have been examined throughout the life cycle. In vegetative cells, a single major isoelectric species is detected for each enzymatic activity on native nonequilibrium isoelectric focusing gels. Between 6 and 10 hr of development, all activities, including the preformed enzyme, become less negatively charged, resulting in a modest but reproducible shift in the isoelectric focusing pattern. This alteration is not detected by native gel electrophoresis at constant pH. As development continues, the specific activity of beta-glucosidase, alpha-mannosidase, and acid phosphatase continues to increase and coincidentally, new, less acidic isozymic bands of activity can be observed on both gel systems. Some of these new isozymes accumulate preferentially in anterior cells, while others accumulate preferentially in posterior cells of migrating slugs. N-Acetylglucosaminidase does not increase in specific activity late in development and no new isozymic species appear. Using a monoclonal antibody that reacts with sulfated N-linked oligosaccharides shared by vegetative lysosomal enzymes in D. discoideum, the antigenicity of the developmental isozymes has been characterized. All of the enzymatic activity present during vegetative growth and early development is immunoprecipitable. However, the less negatively charged isozymes that accumulate after aggregation are not recognized by the antibody. Nonantigenic acid phosphatase and alpha-mannosidase are found in both anterior and posterior cells from migrating pseudoplasmodia. Since each enzyme is coded by a single structural gene, these results suggest that the isozymes present late in development arise from the synthesis of the same polypeptides with altered post-translational modifications. The appearance of anterior and posterior specific isozymes is likely to be the result of cell type specific changes in the glycoprotein modification pathway for newly synthesized proteins.
