Synergistic activation of rat brain phospholipase D by ADP-ribosylation factor and rhoA p21, and its inhibition by Clostridium botulinum C3 exoenzyme. 
An activator of rat brain phospholipase D (PLD) that is distinct from the already identified PLD activator, ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF), was partially purified from bovine brain cytosol by a series of chromatographic steps. The partially purified preparation contained a 22-kDa substrate for Clostridium botulinum C3 exoenzyme ADP-ribosyltransferase, which strongly reacted with anti-rhoA p21 antibody, but not with anti-rac1 p21 or anti-cdc42Hs p21 antibody. Treatment of the partially purified PLD-activating factor with both C3 exoenzyme and NAD significantly inhibited the PLD-stimulating activity. These results suggest that rhoA p21 is, at least in part, responsible for the PLD-stimulating activity in the preparation. Recombinant isoprenylated rhoA p21 expressed in and purified from Sf9 cells activated rat brain PLD in a concentration- and GTP gamma S (guanosine 5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate))-dependent manner. In contrast, recombinant non-isoprenylated rhoA p21 (fused to glutathione S-transferase) expressed in Escherichia coli failed to activate the PLD. This difference cannot be explained by a lower affinity of non-isoprenylated rhoA p21 for GTP gamma S, as the rates of [35S]GTP gamma S binding were very similar for both recombinant preparations and the GTP gamma S-bound form of non-isoprenylated rhoA p21 did not induce PLD activation. Interestingly, recombinant isoprenylated rhoA p21 and ARF synergistically activated rat brain PLD; a similar pattern was seen with the partially purified PLD-activating factor. The synergistic activation was inhibited by C3 exoenzyme-catalyzed ADP-ribosylation of recombinant isoprenylated rhoA p21 in a NAD-dependent manner. Inhibition correlated with the extent of ADP-ribosylation. These findings suggest that rhoA p21 regulates rat brain PLD in concert with ARF, and that isoprenylation of rhoA p21 is essential for PLD regulation in vitro. 